Jamia Millia Islamia, Central university in New Delhi, India. Jamia Millia Islamia (Urdu: جامعہ ملّیہ اسلامیہ, abbreviated as JMI) is a premier central university located in New Delhi, India. Originally established at Aligarh, United Provinces (present-day Uttar Pradesh, India) during the British Empire in 1920, it moved to its current location in Okhla in 1935. It was given the deemed status by University Grants Commission in 1962. Jamia Millia Islamia became a central university in the year 1988 by an act of the Indian Parliament which was passed on December 26, 1988.
The university was founded by Mahmud Hasan Deobandi, Mohammad Ali Jauhar, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, Abdul Majeed Khwaja, Allama Iqbal, Dr Zakir Hussain, Mahatma Gandhi and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Its foundation stone was laid by Mahmud Hasan Deobandi, the leader of the Silk Letter Movement and the first student of Darul Uloom Deoband. Muhammad Ali Jauhar served as its first vice-chancellor from 1920 to 1923, and Hakim Ajmal Khan served as the first chancellor from 1920 to 1927. On 26 May 2017, Najma Heptulla became the 11th Chancellor of the university, and Najma Akhtar became the first woman to hold the post of Vice Chancellor in April 2019 and served there till 12 November 2023. On 13th March 2023, Mufaddal Saifuddin was elected the 12th Chancellor of the university, replacing Najma Heptulla. In 2020, Jamia Millia Islamia was ranked 1st among all central universities in the country in rankings released by the Ministry of Education of India. In December 2021, the university received an 'A++' ranking by National Assessment and Accreditation Council.
History. A 1970 Indian stamp dedicated to the 50th anniversary of Jamia Millia Islamia. Jamia Millia Islamia was established in Aligarh on 29 October 1920 by Mohammad Ali Jauhar, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, Abdul Majeed Khwaja, and Zakir Hussain under the presidency of Mahmud Hasan Deobandi. It was established mainly in response to the demand of some students of the Aligarh Muslim University for a new National Muslim University which would be free from government influence as they felt that the administration of Aligarh Muslim University was of pro-British stance.
It was conceived as a national institution that would offer progressive education and an emphasis on Indian nationalism to students from all communities, particularly Muslims. Zakir Hussain described “the movement of Jamia Millia Islamia as a struggle for education and cultural renaissance that aims to prepare a blueprint for Indian Muslims which may focus on Islam but simultaneously evolve a national culture for common Indian. It will lay the foundation of the thinking that true religious education will promote patriotism and national integration among Indian Muslims, who will be proud to take part in the future progress of India, which will play its part in the comity of nations for peace and development. The objective of establishment of Jamia Millia Islamia will be to lay down the common curriculum for Indian Muslims taking into account the future challenges and will prepare the children to be masters of future.” The emergence of Jamia was supported by Mahatma Gandhi, who felt that Jamia Millia Islamia could shape the lives of hundreds and thousands of students on the basis of a shared culture and worldview, so Gandhi sent his youngest son Devdas Gandhi to teach Hindi in Jamia.
In 1925, Jamia Millia Islamia moved from Aligarh to Karol Bagh, New Delhi. On 1 March 1935, the foundation stone for a school building was laid at Okhla, then a nondescript village in the southern outskirts of Delhi. In 1936, all institutions of Jamia Millia Islamia except Jamia Press, the Maktaba, and the library moved to the new campus. The University Grants Commission gave Jamia Millia Islamia the deemed status in 1962. Subsequently, on 26 December 1988, it attained the status of a central university through an act of the Indian parliament. In 2006, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia paid a visit to the university and donated USD 30 million for the construction of a library and a research center. In 2019, the university emerged as a center of the Citizenship Amendment Act protests after the act was passed by the Parliament. On 13 December 2019, Delhi Police tried to forcefully dismiss the protest of students and threw tear gas inside the campus on students to control their agitation. On 15 December 2019, police entered the campus on the pretext of trying to catch the mob that destroyed public peace outside the university campus. Many students sustained injuries because of the police brutality and it sparked protests in several other universities.
Founders. Jamia was founded by a group of scholars and activists including Muhammad Ali Jauhar, Hakim Ajmal Khan and Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari. The foundation stone was laid by Mahmud Hasan Deobandi, an Islamic scholar and activist of the Indian independence movement. He was invited to preside over the foundational ceremony of the university in Aligarh. His speech was prepared and read aloud by his student Shabbir Ahmad Usmani. Its subsequent makers included Abdul Majeed Khwaja, Abid Hussain, Mohammad Mujeeb and Zakir Hussain. Jamia's establishment was supported by politicians such as Maulana Azad and Mahatma Gandhi. The foundation committee of the Jamia included Kifayatullah Dehlawi, Hussain Ahmad Madani, Syed Sulaiman Nadwi, Abdul Haq, Abdul Bari Firangi Mahali, Shabbir Ahmad Usmani, Sanaullah Amritsari, Muhammad Iqbal, Syed Mahmud and Saifuddin Kitchlew.
Campus. The campus is distributed over a large area in the Okhla area of Delhi. Many of its buildings are under renovation. The university's scenic cricket ground, Nawab Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi Sports Complex, has hosted many important tournaments and Indian women's cricket matches. This ground also hosted the University Cricket Championship in 2013. Besides its seven faculties, Jamia has centers of learning and research, including the Anwar Jamal Kidwai Mass Communication Research Centre (MCRC), Faculty of Engineering & Technology, Faculty of Fine Arts, Centre for Theoretical Physics and the Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar Academy of International Studies. Jamia offers undergraduate and postgraduate information and technology courses. Jamia Millia Islamia joined the green campaign and installed 2,250-kilowatt solar panels on the campus. To commemorate the 100 years of existence, the existing Gate No. 13 of the university was remodeled and named Centenary Gate, which was inaugurated on university's 103rd foundation day.
North Campus. Former Vice-Chancellor, Najma Akhtar, at centenary convocation on 23 July 2024, announced that the university has obtained approval from the Centre government to establish a medical college. Furthermore, she mentioned that they are currently working on setting up an international campus in Dubai International Academic City, West Asia.
Sports. Cricket Ground. Jamia has created and maintained sports facilities and infrastructure for holding cultural events and other co-curricular activities. Initially, the University got recognition in sports when Jamia won its first Gold and Silver Medal in Wrestling in 1977 at the All India Inter University Championship. Ranji Trophy and Vijaya Trophy matches are a regular event every year at the Jamia Cricket ground. In the past, Jamia has hosted Women's Cricket Test matches, Women’s World Cup matches and Blind’s Cricket World Cup matches. The facilities were used as practice ground for Commonwealth Games as well. The ground within its periphery also consists of a centrally air-conditioned indoor games stadium. The sports complex has facilities for: Cricket, Football, Lawn Tennis Court, Volleyball Court, Badminton, Basketball, Jogging Track, Athletics, Table Tennis, Yoga, Snooker Room and Hockey. The Complex is equipped with latest gymnasium and sports equipment. The admissions under sports category following games are Athletics, Boxing, Badminton, Basketball, Cricket, Football, Hockey, Shooting (Air Rifle, Air Pistol and Shot Gun), Table Tennis, Lawn Tennis, Volleyball and Wrestling.
Library. Dr Zakir Husain Library. The University Library System, consisting of a centralized and departmental libraries and archives, has over 6 lakhs and approximately 1.43 lakhs subject-specific books, the best Urdu book collections; 5000 rare books; and 2230 rare manuscripts. Besides the print section, Library extensively subscribes to open access to videos; e-resources; eBooks; e-journals; other academic materials; databases for Sciences, Social Sciences, Arts-Humanities, Engineering, Law; few select databases are subscribed by University through e-Shodhganga; MOOCs courses; member of NAD. Provision of remote access to databases; and anti-plagiarism software. The Digital Resource Centre has 100 workstations as a gateway for online resources and 200 computers for students. The library is open to all bona fide students of Jamia Millia Islamia. Besides this, there are subject collection in libraries of some faculties and centres.
Health Facilities. Dr M A Ansari Health Centre. The University provides free medical facilities for students, teaching and non-teaching staff through Ansari Health Centre, Faculty of Dentistry, Centre for Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Services and Unani Pharmacy. Ambulance services are available 24 hours for any emergency needs. A panel of specialist doctors (consultant) in different fields/area visit Jamia twice a week.
Mosques. Central Mosque, Jamia Millia Islamia. The varsity has got certain mosques in the campus including the Central Mosque. The central mosque is located opposite to the central library and has a capacity of over 1000 people. This mosque is situated on Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar Marg, Delhi.
Organisation and administration. Governance. The governing officials of the university include the Amir-i-Jamia (chancellor), the Shaikh-ul-Jamia (vice-chancellor), the Naib Shaikh-ul-Jamia (Pro-Vice-Chancellor) and the Musajjil (Registrar). The President of India is the Visitor of the university. The Anjuman or University Court is the supreme authority of the university and has the power to review the acts of the Majlis-i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) the Majlis-i-Talimi (Academic Council) and the Majlis-i-Maliyat (Finance Committee). The Executive Council is the highest executive body of the university. The Academic Council is the highest academic body of the university and is responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination within the university. In 2017, Najma Heptulla was appointed as the Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia. In 2019, Najma Akhtar was appointed as the first woman vice-chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia and served there till 12 November 2023. In 2023, Syedna Mufaddal Saifuddin succeeded Najma Heptulla and was appointed as the Chancellor of Jamia Millia Islamia.
Faculties. Jamia Millia Islamia has eleven faculties under which it offers academic and extension programs.
Faculty of Law. Established in 1989, the Faculty of Law offered only the three-year LL.B. course until the early 2000s, but started additionally offering the integrated 5 Years B.A. LL.B(Hons.) course for UG students from the academic year 2002–2003. The faculty offers apart from a five-year integrated B.A. LL.B (Hons.) programme, a two-year post-graduate programme (LLM) in three specialised streams (personal law, corporate law and criminal law) and a Ph.D. programme. It also offers two-year Executive LL.M programme for working professionals. The faculty secured the 9th rank among law schools in India as per NIRF LAW Ranking 2020. The courses taught at the faculty include LL. M, Personal Law, Corporate Law, Criminal Law, B.A. LL.B (Hons), P.G. Diploma, Labour Law and Air and Space Law.
Faculty of Engineering and Technology. MiG-23, Fighter Jet of the Indian Air Force stands in front of the Faculty of Engineering. The Faculty of Engineering and Technology (FET) was established in 1985. It has several departments offering programmes in PhD, M.Tech, M.Sc, B.Tech and B.Sc including Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics & Communication Engineering, Computer Engineering, Aeronautics, Applied Sciences & Humanities and Environmental Science. They also provide specialization courses for master's degrees such as Artificial Intelligence, Data Sciences, VLSI Design and Technology, Solid State Technology, Environmental Science and Engineering, Earthquake Engineering, Machine Design, Thermal Engineering, Production and Industrial Engineering, Electrical Power Management System, Control & Instrumental System, Electronics, Energy Science and Management, Energy Science and Technology. The faculty offers regular courses and continuing programmes. In the Times Higher Education Subject Ranking-2020, JMI ranked 401–500 in Engineering and Technology. Within India its rank is 11 among all higher education institutions while among universities it is 2nd position. JMI was placed at 501–600 in computer science, while among Indian Institutions it has been ranked at 16th position and at 7th among Indian universities.
Faculty of Architecture and Ekistics. Jamia Millia Islamia is the only Central university having the full-fledged Faculty of Architecture & Ekistics. The architecture program was started in the Year 2001–2002. This Faculty has the Department of Architecture which offers two-degree courses in Bachelor of Architecture, Nine Masters courses and PhD. The courses include undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral studies in subjects such as Architecture, Architecture Pedagogy, Healthcare Architecture, Building Services, Recreational Architecture, Urban Regeneration, Ekistics, Master of Planning (M.Plan) and Master of Design (M.Des).
Faculty of Humanities and Languages. This Faculty has nine departments offering programmes in PhD, M Phil (pre-PhD), Postgraduate, Undergraduate, Diploma and Certificate courses.Department of English, Jamia Millia Islamia. The faculty has departments including Arabic, English, Hindi, History and Culture, Islamic Studies, Persian, Iranology, Urdu, Sanskrit and Foreign Languages such as Korean, Turkish, French and Spanish and Latin. Also provide certificates, diploma programme like Chinese, Uzbek, Portuguese, Russian, Kazakh, Italian, Pashto etc. Islamic Studies has been a subject at Jamia Millia Islamia since its inception. It was instituted as a separate department in 1988. The department has been headed by scholars like Zayn al-Abidin Sajjad Meerthi. The department publishes an annual magazine, Sada e Jauhar. Faculty of Fine Arts. This Faculty has six departments offering programmes in PhD, Master of Fine Arts (MFA), Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA), diploma and certificate courses. The subjects taught include Painting, Sculpture, Applied Arts, Art Education, Graphic Art and Art History & Art Appreciation. The campus has an art gallery named after the Indian painter M. F. Hussain. M.F Husain Art Gallery. Faculty of Social Sciences. Gulistan-e-Ghalib, which features the statue of Mirza Ghalib. The varsity's Faculty of Social Sciences consists of nine departments. These include the departments for Social Sciences, Psychology, Economics, Political Science, Sociology, Social Work, Adult Continuing Education and Extension, Commerce and Business Studies, Library and Information Science. The Faculty of Social Sciences is based around Gulistan-e-Ghalib and is commonly referred to as the Main Campus.
Faculty of Sciences.The Faculty of Sciences consists of five departments i.e., Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Geography and Computer Science. In addition, there are three associated centres namely FTK- Centre for Information Technology, Centre for Theoretical Physics and Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology.
Faculty of Life Sciences. Srinivasa Ramanujan Block, Faculty of Life Sciences. The faculty of Life Sciences, based in Srinivasa Ramanujan Block at Mujeeb Bagh Campus, consists of two departments i.e., Biosciences and Biotechnology, which offers courses in Ph.D., postgraduate, undergraduate and diploma in Unani Pharmacy and Ph.D. Unani Medicine. In addition, centres associated with faculty are namely Centre for Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Multidisciplinary Centre for Advanced Research and Studies, Central Instrumentation Facility, Animal House Facility and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Kaushal Kendra.
Faculty of Education. Department of Adult Continuing Education and Extension, TTI. Teachers’ Training Institute was established in 1938 under the inspiring leadership of Dr. Zakir Husain for the purpose of training teachers for Basic Schools according to the scheme of Basic Education. Later, it was renamed as Teachers’ College. The College initiated Teacher Education Programme for Art and Craft Teachers and in Art Education. The Faculty of Education, through its two departments namely Educational Studies and Institute of Advanced Studies in Education, formerly known as the department of Teacher Training and Non-Formal Education runs 12 different programmes including B.Ed, M.Ed, M.A. The Faculty also offers diploma, M.Phil. and Doctoral programme in Education.
Faculty of Dentistry. This faculty offers B. D. S. programs. 
Faculty of Management Studies. The faculty consists of three departments for Management Studies, Hospital Management & Hospice Studies, and Tourism & Hospitality Management.
Centers. AJK Mass Communication Research Center. FTK Communication Centre in the campus. The Mass Communication Research Centre was established in 1982 by Anwar Jamal Kidwai, then vice-chancellor (later chancellor) of Jamia Millia Islamia. The centers offers postgraduate courses in Mass Communication. The FTK-Centre for Information Technology provides internet facility for the faculty members, staff, research scholars, and students. The centre offers courses including Master of Arts(M.A.) courses in Mass Communication, Convergent Journalism, Development Communication, Visual Effect and Animation as well as postgraduate diplomas in, Still Photography and Visual Communication, Acting and Broadcast Technology. Centre for Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation Sciences. The centre offers courses including , (B.P.T) Bachelor of Physiotherapy, M.P.T. (Sports), M.P.T. (Orthopaedics), M.P.T. (Neurology), M.P.T. (Cardiopulmonary) and the doctorate in philosophy. Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. The centre aims to promote forefront basic and applied research in the fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology, with potential applications towards fulfilling national strategic needs. The main research focus of the centre includes nano-fabrication and nano-device, nano-materials and nano-structures, nano-biotechnology and nano-medicine, nano-structure characterization and measurements. Its offers PhD and M.Tech (Nanotechnology) courses. Centre for Spanish and Latin American Studies. The centre offers part-time Certificate, Diploma and Advanced Diploma courses in five languages viz. French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese and Russian. It also offers M.Phil/PhD in European Studies and Latin American Studies. MMAJ Academy of International Studies. Formerly Academy of Third World Studies, MMAJ Academy of International Studies was established in 1988 under the initiative of the then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi to conduct inter-disciplinary research on social, political and economic issues pertaining to the developing countries. Subsequently, it was renamed after one of the co-founders of Jamia Millia Islamia, Maulana Mohamad Ali Jauhar.The academy offers M.Phil. and Ph.D. programmes in International Studies, postgraduate courses (Politics: International and Area Studies) and language courses in Uzbek and Chinese. It also has its own library and documentation centre, named after Dr. Abid Husain, another founder of Jamia Millia Islamia.
Other centers. Jamia's other academic and non-academic centers include Dr. Zakir Husain Institute of Islamic Studies, Centre for Distance and Open Learning, Nelson Mandela Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution, Centre for Jawaharlal Nehru Studies, Centre for Comparative Religions and Civilizations, Centre for West Asian Studies, Dr. K.R. Narayanan Centre for Dalit and Minorities Studies, Academy of Professional Development of Urdu Medium Teachers, Centre for North East Studies and Policy Research, India – Arab Cultural Centre, Centre for Culture Media & Governance, Centre for the Study of Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy, UGC-Human Resource Development Centre, Centre for Coaching and Career Planning, Jamia's Premchand Archives & Literary Centre, Sarojini Naidu Centre for Women's Studies, University Counseling & Guidance Centre, Centre for Early Childhood Development and Research and Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CIE).
Schools. Jamia Millia Islamia also imparts education from nursery to senior secondary level. Its schools include: Balak Mata Centre, Gerda Philipsborn Day Care Centre, Mushir Fatma Jamia Nursery School, Jamia Middle School, Jamia Senior Secondary School, Syed Abid Husain Senior Secondary School, Jamia Girls Senior Secondary School.
Rankings. Internationally, Jamia Millia Islamia was ranked 801–1000 in the QS World University Rankings of 2023 and 188 in Asia. It was ranked 501–600 in the world by the London based Times Higher Education World University Rankings of 2023, 128 in Asia in 2023 and 172 among emerging economies. Jamia Millia Islamia has been ranked 428 out of 1100 universities worldwide by Moscow based Round University Ranking 2023. According to U.S. News & World Report, Jamia Millia Islamia is ranked #856 in Best Global Universities. Schools are ranked according to their performance across a set of widely accepted indicators of excellence. Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) has secured the first position among all the central universities in the country in the ranking that was released by the Ministry of Education with a score of 90 per cent. It was ranked 12th in India overall by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2023, 3rd among universities, 5th in law ranking, 6th in architecture ranking, 10th in the dental ranking, 26th in the engineering ranking, 20th in Research institutes and 25th in the management ranking. The Faculty of Law was ranked 6 among government law schools in India by Outlook India in 2022.
Cultural Festival. Jamia Millia Islamia organizes various cultural festivals including the annual festival. The university organises Talimi Mela on its Foundation Day of 29 to 30 October every year. Jamia has also the legacy of celebrating national cultural festival called MiRAAS. It was initiated by Dean Students of Welfare where various cultural and competitive events were organised by the students. It was not being organised after 2017.
Alumni and faculties. Since its inception, Jamia Millia Islamia has produced alumni across various disciplines, including Shah Rukh Khan, Kabir, Vinit Utpal, Mouni Roy, Arfa Khanum Sherwani, Barkha Dutt, Anjana Om Kashyap, Ampareen Lyngdoh, Kunwar Danish Ali, Virendar Sehwag, Imran Raza Ansari, Danish Siddiqui and Mohammad Najeeb Qasmi.